Review of the Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages

Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages. Charles Darwin University et al, 2012, http://laal.cdu.edu.au/. Accessed 17 oct. 2018

Simplicity is one of the key words for the Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages. This digital repository contains over 2500 books written in more than 25 indigenous languages of the Northern Territory of Australia, but the texts are available through a very easy-to-use interface displaying a clickable geographical map, with icons that redirect the user to the materials. Another key word for this collection is right there in its name: “Living”. The books are classified as “endangered literatures” on the website, thus the archive is set up to enhance their liveness by displaying them in an open access online platform. One of the main goals of this ongoing endeavor, as the “about” page states, is to connect these literatures to the communities they belong to. Why were these texts disconnected from their social origins in the first place? The answer is in the background story. 

The Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages was created in 2012 by the Charles Darwin University, the Australian National University and the NT Department of Education and Children’s Services, with funding from the Australian Research Council through the Linkage Infrastructure Equipment and Facilities scheme. On a second phase, the archive received financial aid again from the Research Council, and added three more educational institutions to the working team. All these organizations partnered up to gather the scattered books of twenty school-based Literature Production Centres at the Northern Territory, that from 1973 to early 2000 produced an amazing amount of indigenous knowledge recorded in very simple literary projects. 

The “centres” were part of a discontinued Bilingual Program of northern Australia that aimed for the literacy of aboriginal children. Indigenous and non-indigenous people worked together to write and illustrate the books that contain “teaching materials, literacy primers, children’s stories, stories of local cultural significance such as environmental knowledge, traditional practices, oral literature, ethno-botany, history, non-sacred versions of Dreaming or Creation stories, experience stories, instructional manuals, cautionary tales, and many others” (Bow et al 348). The source of this documents were the oral narratives, and common knowledges of the indigenous communities in their own languages. Due to changes to educational policies, by 2010 the majority of the Centres closed, and the schools managed the materials in different ways that range from using them for educational purposes to actually destroying them (Bow et al 347-250). Today, some of the physical books are available in special collections of university libraries, and the rest, a large number, are dispersed within the communities and local educational centers and institutions. Therefore, access to these books and the indigenous knowledges they hold was selective and/or difficult before the creation of the digital collection.

Access is an important word for this archive, but for whom is the key question. Jeannette A. Bastian states “the creation of collective memory by nations, communities, or groups of people depends upon their ability to access their own cultural heritage” (81). For Bastian, access should be a fundamental component of custody. The Living Archive takes this insightful argument in practice as an example of postcustodial archiving. The project does not include keeping the original material, rather is invested in making the books reachable for a diverse group of people –linguists, teachers, students, researches, as their website guide shows. But more important is its redress to the communities that created the books, because the digital collection liberated their own cultural heritage from depending on the aftermath power infrastructures and custody of a discontinued bilingual educational program. 

There is evidence of an accountability and ethical responsibility to the indigenous peoples of the Northern Territory from the first time one enters the website. A notice that reads “Respecting ownership” is at its gate. It indicates that the contents belong to the “Aboriginal language owners, creators of the materials and their descendants.” The notice also serves as a warning to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander users about the inclusion of “names, images, and voices of people who have passed away.” Once entered the website, browsing is very easy. Apart from the mentioned interactive map organized by places and languages, there is a menu bar with different categories for searching purposes: “Place”, “Language”, “People” (authors and illustrators), and “Books”. After a selection has been made, the new page shows the covers of the books. Some of them are very colorful, and most of them have a naïve esthetic meant for attracting the attention of children. The metadata is very thorough –title, author, illustrator, place, year of publication, abstract, description/genre, and others–, and it is followed by a “Right Statement” that resumes the decolonial practice of contacting the creators for permission to publish. The notice also calls for users to reach out if they feel the book should not be shown. All the documents are available for exploring in PDF format, and for downloads. The website has a Creative Common License that privileges the sharing of the material.

To sum up, or more accurately to start the conversation some conclusions are in hand. It is important to acknowledge that the Living Archive is not community-based (following Michelle Caswell’s reflections), which would be a step forward in the decolonization of indigenous knowledges. It is not the case here because the archive was designed, and today is managed mostly by powerful knowledge-making universities external to the communities. The website is hosted in the Charles Darwin University Library’s open source Fez and Fedora based research repository. That being said, the Living Archive is a good community-centered model for educational institutions from other geographies, like Latin America, that can gather the resources, and have the infrastructure to make an ambitious project like this possible. Then, what is at stake in the making of this digital collection? At stake is the postcustodial turn of archival work, that in the context of indigenous materials means giving back. This collection shows a dedicated, thorough, and ethically responsible work looking after indigenous knowledges that puts the creators in the center by recognizing their ownership and negotiating control. The Living Archive opens the doors to thinking of post-custodial practices for indigenous collections in diverse, even radical, decolonial ways. 

Works Cited

Bow, Catherine et al. “Developing a Living Archives of Aboriginal Languages”. Language Documentation and Conservation. Vol. 8, 2014, pp. 345-360.
Bastian, Jeannette. “Taking Custody, Giving Access: A Postcustodial role for a new Century”.   
